well hello everybody this is my
presentation of the night sky for
september
2020 by way of a planetarium show
using the stellarium software that you
can download free from the internet
so here we have the view looking over
the
landscape in the afternoon of the 1st of
september
and what i shall do is set the
planetarium software running
we'll go over towards the west and
they have the sun there just uh with the
orange sky
as it's heading down towards sunset
we're going to let time run forward now
and drive it through till the point
where the sky
is beginning to get dark and one or two
of the first stars will appear so
the sun moves down below the horizon
sky reddens and darkens quite
considerably
and then we're going to spring it to a
halt here at 8 15 in the evening just in
the last of the twilight
to begin the show and here we have the
first
star that will appear up there in the
southwest
and that is arcturus arcturus is a
star a little bit uh similar to the sun
but older
it's already gone into its red giant
phase and
swelled up due to running out of fuel in
the core
so it's around seven billion years old
that's relatively nearby at only about
48 light years from us
now down here towards the south of the
sky you'll also find the planet jupiter
perfectly positioned to have a good look
at with binoculars you'll see the four
moons with a small telescope you'll see
the disk of the planets like this
with the cloud belts across it as well
and the four moons lined up there
three on one side tonight and one on the
left there
we've got the names of them there io
europa ganymede and callisto
in order of distance from the planet but
let's have a look at the planets in more
detail you need a really powerful
telescope to see it like this
uh the observatory that i run i managed
to get images
roughly this sort of quality and it's
amazing how much detail there is in the
atmosphere
the famous great red spot is on the
other side of the planet
at this time but you can see several
lesser spots there
whirling around in the clouds and they
change from night to night so it's
fascinating to watch
now if we zoom right in here with the
digital zoom on the first of jupiter's
moons
to have a look at that's io looks like a
very cheesy pizza but all of those
colors
are the colors of different forms of
sulfur we have the black the red
the orange and the yellow and white
forms of sulfur
covering the surface it's the most
volcanic moon in the solar system by far
second distance wise from jupiter is the
small moon europa say small it's a
little bit smaller than the earth's moon
io is perhaps just a little tiny bit
larger than our own moon
and europa is fascinating because it's
covered in this white
ice crust very shiny in color
crisscrossed by all those grooves and
those are where the ice cream is cracked
and some sort of organic material is
welling up
from underneath and it's well worth the
possibility of exploring that underneath
the ice
there for a briny ocean that might
contain life
that's also true here on the largest
moon in the solar system
jupiter moon number three ganymede
covered in these icy glacier features
and one or two
crater impacts so a slightly older less
dynamic
surface than that of europa
i'll pull back away from jupiter now and
move out over here to the right
where we find the most distant of the
four galilean moons discovered by
galileo and that's callisto
it's covered in craters a very old
surface
lots of time for craters to accumulate
on top of each other
almost that infinite as the surface is
not being recovered
by other geological processes like
glaciers and
so forth so we'll pull back away from
jupiter you can see the milky way
dipping down to the south horizon there
there's star clouds of the milky way
we'll zoom in there in a moment but
first we'll just move
slightly to the east and the planet
saturn is following jupiter across the
sky at the moment
this is what it would look like with a
small telescope with the body of the
planet
the lovely rings you can see the
cassini division between the main a and
the b ring there
you can also see the shadow of the
planet on the rings
and a family of moons there titan the
apatus dione ria
tethys enceladus mimos hyperion and so
on
you can usually see about five of those
with a amateur sized
telescope this is what it would look
like if you have a very powerful
instrument you can zoom right in and get
a fantastic view
of the cloud belts somewhat more modest
coloration than jupiter it's always a
little bit more pastel shades than the
vibrancy of jupiter's clouds
largest moon of saturn and second only
to ganymede
at jupiter this is titan and it's a
fascinating world it's covered in a
thick atmosphere that's considerably
thicker than our own
and full of clouds of smoggy organic
material
lots of interesting chemistry going on
there and the
surface seems to have lakes and rivers
and all sorts of active processes
so we need to go back there and study
that in more detail
very cold out that far out in the solar
system minus 160
degrees centigrade now those two planets
are just
in the edge of the constellation of
sagittarius the
archer and it's just dipping below the
horizon here now
i joined it up here with the stick
diagram it looks more like a teapot to
me
rather than an archer but apparently
that's what it's supposed to look like
according to the ancient myths by which
the constellations were named i can't
quite make that out myself
but it's an excellent place to go uh
star cloud surfing
if you have a pair of binoculars right
into the thick of the milky way here
um even with a telescope again you'll
find the
things like this the eagle nebula with
the pillars of creation right
in the center there so famously
photographed by the hubble space
telescope where new stars are being
formed
and all of this pink material this is
hydrogen
gas being lit up by the light of
the stars that have been formed in these
regions
this is the swan nebula again
star formation going on here in large
numbers they will
produce a new star cluster
and then those star clusters gradually
fall apart
gravitational interactions between stars
throw out
members from the cluster and they
gradually lose them
this is the lagoon nebula even easier to
find very very bright this one
fascinating and you can see the nascent
star cluster
in the center there and it's beginning
with the starlight to blow a bubble
and blow away the remains of its birth
nebula
and that's what happens that switches
off the star forming process
just above it we have the triffid nebula
crisscrossed by these amazing
dark dust lanes which are the original
cold dusty regions out of which all of
these
process of star formation began
you can see the pink color but you also
see some blue there
we'll pull back now
excuse me pull back away from that again
you see the magnificent star clouds of
sagittarius there we're looking more or
less towards the center of the milky way
here
which is very very densely populated
with all these nebulae these dark
dust lanes star forming regions and
millions and millions of stars
now we'll let time run forward that's
why you can see one or two things moving
now those are satellites that this
software knows about
and we'll speed things up you'll see
them zip around
we'll let sagittarius set down below the
horizon
bring it to a halt at 11 p.m when the
sky will be just about
uh perfect for observing
now over here we have the moon of course
the moon changes position from night to
night
but it's uh just about full on this
occasion
and this is the corn moon as they call
it the harvest moon would be the one
nearer
the end of the month if there was a full
moon but the next one will be in october
so we won't quite
have a harvest moon this year you can
see the dark
uh regions there the mare those are
giant
impact basins from the early history of
the moon when material was in falling
and
creating giant holes in the ground
our the moon is sitting in the
constellation of
aquarius at the moment and
aquarius the water carrier there's the
stick diagram
showing how the ancient peoples decided
to join the stars up to try and make
some sort of familiar pattern
and there's aquarius the water carrier
you do have to use your imagination
quite a lot to make these constellations
appear
as their intended
now that of course is one of the
constellations of the zodiac
in which we find all the planets
and the planets line themselves up in a
nice straight line across the sky
and if we drill into aquarius here we'll
find another one
and this is the planet neptune the
outermost planet of the four gas giants
so here it is lovely blue color even
with an amateur telescope you'll only
see a small blue dot
and it's got a family of moons and a
family of rings as well which were
discovered by the voyager 2 spacecraft
the blue color is caused by methane in
the atmosphere it's a very large amount
of methane gas
making up her most of the atmosphere of
neptune there but those four moons are
probably too small to see with an
amateur telescope
but it does have one very large moon
called triton
and triton is a fascinating moon because
it goes the wrong way around neptune
almost everything in the solar system
rotates in the same direction
but triton is going in a retrograde
orbit the wrong way
and it's probably been captured by
neptune and has come from
further out and when we look at it we
see these
mottled surface and the dark markings
there
and those were best photographed by the
voyager 2 probe as it flew past
the dark markings turned out to be
active liquid nitrogen
geysers bursting forth on the surface of
this little moon very interesting body
is possibly the twin of pluto it may
have been that
triton and pluto formed together and
encountered neptune
triton got captured and pluto flung into
the current
further out orbit now we've moved
up a little bit and to the constellation
of cygnus the swan
and this one really does look like what
it's supposed to with the long neck and
the stretched out
wings there i can really make that one
out myself
and there are lots and lots of
interesting objects in this area partly
because the
neckline there lines up with
the path of the milky way but if you go
out onto one of the wings of cygnus here
we find the remains of an expanding
shock wave from an ancient supernova
this is called the veil nebula and it's
a very very beautiful object to track
down
in a telescope and you
tend to need to use anti-light pollution
filters to pick this out of the
background
but if you do then i recommend an oxygen
3 filter if you happen to have one
um they're widely available from
astronomy and telescope shops
and they make all the difference to
observing these sorts of faint nebulae
here's another nebula called the
crescent nebula you can see that
crescent shape
and in the center there is a very very
powerful
star called a wolf rayet star it's
become so hot due to its enormous mass
at 100 times the mass of the sun
here it is in high resolution using the
hubble space telescope images
that most of the outer layers of the
star have been shed and blown away
creating that crescent-shaped shock wave
and exposing the active nuclear core
these wolf-rayet stars live fast and die
young
they only last about 10 million years
before they
blow themselves apart in a supernova so
that one's due to explode
sometime real soon now in astronomical
terms
much larger and observable with a wide
field telescope or a camera
on a tripod or a pair of binoculars is
the north american nebula
and here you can kind of see the outline
of the
shape of the north american continent
here's the hubble
image it's a different color because the
hubble
uh tends to use some of the infrared
light and so we have to go to false
color
the real color is this pink that you
would see with your eye
and the gulf of mexico there that dark
region is just a
gap in the dust clouds
fascinating objects very easy to
photograph with a just a camera on a
tripod
because it's much larger than the full
moon on the sky
now we come down to the beak of the swan
at the other end
and the double star alberio i recommend
looking at this with binoculars
or a small telescope the colors of the
two components of alberio
really make a good contrast one is
orange and the other is blue
a very blue hot star hotter even than
white hot
the colors of the stars tell us their
temperature
just below alberio we've got a familiar
looking pattern of
an upside down coat hanger we call this
the coat hanger cluster
informally but it's not really a cluster
of stars in three dimensions because the
stars are all at different distances
they just happen to line up
and make that uh human familiar pattern
over to the left of that we find the
dumbbell nebula
now this is a where a star like the sun
has reached the end of its life
and has puffed off its outer atmosphere
in these two sort of giant
cones of material off the north and
south rotation axis of the star
leaving a white dwarf in the center and
the amazing expanding cloud of material
that'll dissipate in about ten thousand
years they uh they have to catch them
right in the act
so they're relatively few and far
between
so we've now moved over to the east of
uh
cygnus a little bit lower down and this
is the constellation of
andromeda we can see it's basically a
line of four stars there that there's
slight kink in them and there's uh the
graphic of uh the maiden andromeda lying
down on the side there
but the interesting objects here are the
neighboring galaxies
we live in the milky way galaxy but you
can already see
and now we'll zoom in on the andromeda
galaxy
this is our near neighbor in space
coming towards us
at 110 kilometers per second and in
about four thousand million years time
it'll begin to merge with the milky way
to make an even larger galaxy
you can see the bright nucleus there
here's the hubble high resolution image
and uh the fantastic dark dust lanes
swirling around the spiral structure
there
the little blob off right in the center
here that is a small
dwarf galaxy that is orbiting around
andromeda
we have some of those the large and
small magellanic clouds
are dwarf galaxies that orbit the milky
way
but the andromeda has a couple here's
another one slightly larger
and these can easily be found with a
modis size telescope if you find the
main galaxy
the main galaxy is actually visible by
eye without any optical aid at all
it's the most distant object that you
can see
so we'll pull back from the lovely
andromeda well worth having a look
um binoculars probably do the best job
on it
but just below in the constellation of
triangulum
we find our other nearby neighbor galaxy
uh unsurprisingly called the triangulum
galaxy
and this again is nicely face onto us
with its somewhat
fluffy looking spiral arm structure and
a very bright nucleus in the middle
there
rather smaller than the milky way it's
about a tenth the number of stars
and the milky way and andromeda are
roughly the same size some estimates put
andromeda
at two or three times the number of
stars others disagree
and say it's only about the same size
further away out in deep space but also
in
an andromeda is the outer limits galaxy
this is 10 times further away than
andromeda
which is two and a half million light
years this one's 27 million light years
and it's perfectly edge on to us so we
can see that dark dust lane carving
across
the center of the galaxy there made
famous because it was used in the
graphics of the outer limits
sci-fi movie in the 1960s
hence it's picked up that name of the
outer limits galaxy
so we'll just pull back a little bit and
you see one or two other
groupings of stars there they have the
line of andromeda
and then the next group over is the
constellation of perseus which makes a
kind of upside down y
structure a little fleck at the bottom
there's some satellites moving but
there's also the california nebula
showing this uh i'll use the mouse
pointer
now here's the california nebula and
then we've got the double cluster up
here you can pick these objects up
very nicely the heart and soul nebula
over here
so very nice objects to look at
and survey especially with binoculars
so we've now moved back to another of
the constellations of the zodiac
this is pisces the fishes and
uh well it's rather strange this one
it's
uh the two sort of heads at the far end
the heads of the fish and then they're
tied together with trails of seaweed
which i think is very contrived
but you can see a very bright orange
object right down there
towards where the seaweed is knotted and
joining
and that's going to be our next target
on this tour of the night sky
and that's the planet mars you can
probably tell by the
uh apparent disk like size of it
and the color the red planet here so
we'll zoom in on mars
and we're going to be having a very good
view of mars this
year here it is with its little moons
phobos and demos
fear and terror mars is the god of war
and so those are very appropriately
named
but here we see the disk of mars we can
zoom in some
some more on that and you can already
see the
dark desert regions and the prominent
orange color
from the rusty nature of the planet
but we can see one or two volcanoes now
this is the fastest plateau i'll just
point them out they're slightly subtle
one
two three there and up here this
is olympus mons the largest volcano in
the solar system
so very very volcanic uh region but not
active anymore it ceased to be volcanic
several billion years ago
when mars lost its atmosphere and its
magnetic field
and froze out so mars going to be
passing it on the inside later this year
and hence we'll be very very close and
get a good view
much more distant but also in pisces at
the moment we have
the outer planet uranus and here's
uranus it's greenish color
disc definitely green compared to
neptune's blue
and it's little family of moons oberon
umbriel titania ariel miranda
the five that you can usually see and
then it has a host of smaller moons that
are invisible they're much too small
also has some very faint rings but you
can't see those with ammeter telescopes
either
the greenish disk of urine is very much
the case that we really don't see any
detail on it at all it's almost
featureless the only detailed images
we've got are with very very powerful
space telescopes
even the voyager flyby saw almost
nothing on the surface
of the cloud tops of uranus there
but worth tracking down just to say that
you've seen it
so we're now going to move on a little
bit over towards the dawn part of the
sky
i'm just peeping onto the screen here as
we can see
we've got the face of taurus the bull
here with the
red giant star aldebaran and
the star cluster the pleiades so we're
speeding time up now and they're
rotating around
as the earth is doing the rotating
underneath the
stars of course and now we're going to
look at
the constellation of orion i normally
look at this in the winter but it's just
becoming visible in the dawn part of the
sky so i thought we'd take a look now
so if you are an early bird and you're
up at uh just before dawn around 4 a.m
you'll be able to say hello to orion the
hunter
and there he is carrying a club and with
some sort of animal pelt
over his arm other people make that uh
diagram look different but
there's the stars which are the
interesting part here's betelgeuse the
red giant star at the top left hand
corner
and this is been misbehaving in recent
times
during the uh winter it was fading
it's come back to more or less the
original brightness again now we think
there might have been a huge eruption
of dirt and dusty material belched out
by the star
that was blocking the starlight but it's
due to explode anytime soon it's
right on the edge of its existence in
terms of running
out of fuel in the core and exploding as
a supernova
down here we have the very famous orion
nebula you can see this with the naked
eye as well
but with a binoculars or a telescope
it's one of my favorite objects
beautiful uh crescent shape in the
center with
the wispier clouds extending further out
right in the middle there with a
telescope you can see the new star
cluster
being formed out of this uh cloud of gas
and dust
has been contracting under gravity over
millions of years
building new stars and new solar systems
now just at the lower star left-hand
star
of orion's belt we can zoom in here and
see a couple of other very interesting
nebulosity regions these clouds of gas
and dust that make
up so much of what we see in the night
sky we've got the horse head nebula
there
a dark tongue of dirty dusty cold
material swirling
in front of some hydrogen gas that's
been lit up by starlight and is emitting
that characteristic pink
color of hydrogen and also the flame
nebula there
just to the left of the bright star so
that's
uh the left hand end of orion's belt so
you can find
the flame nebula relatively easily the
horse head nebula you need quite a
clear sky because it's quite subtle
there's also another type of nebula
up here in orion this is a reflection
nebula where
there's a bright blue star hiding behind
that dirty dust lane in the center
and then the blue light is bouncing back
to us off the clouds
so we're seeing reflected starlight
there and the red
swirling region there that's called
barnard's loop that's down the left-hand
side of orion
there's so many more things we could
look at there now here we have
the last uh of the objects on this tour
and that is the planet venus acting as
the morning star at the moment
very very bright indeed when we zoom in
with a telescope we see the half phase
shape of venus with the bright side
pointing down towards where the sun is
going to come up
because obviously it's the sunlight
bouncing off that lit
side of venus that allows us to see it
and the night side is facing away from
the sun of course
but we don't see very much by way of
detail even with powerful telescopes
because venus has a thick
soupy atmosphere a hundred times as
dense as our own
and full of things like carbon dioxide
and
sulfuric acid it rains
so battery acid it rains heavy metals
it snows things like tellurium
and other strange chemical elements and
the surface temperature is 450 degrees
on venus so i
wouldn't go booking a holiday there if i
were you
so we'll pull back away from venus you
see it shining very brightly in the
morning sky there and just a hint of the
dawn
and so if we let time run forward then
it'll bring us to the end of
the planetarium show for this month i
hope you enjoyed that
whistle stop tour of the night sky from
dusk to dawn
in 30 minutes and uh i hope you have a
look at some of my other videos that are
available
on youtube as a whole series entitled
introduction to astronomy that was the
international space station that just
whizzed past through the screen there
but now the sun's up properly and venus
is disappearing
almost completely you still can find
venus
in the broad daylight if you're careful
and you know just
where to look um it still remains so
bright
as you can see here we can still detect
it even at
7 45 in the morning which is where i'll
bring this
show to a close